Phabricator: [T368336#10019065](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T368336#10019065)

Status: Accepted

Date: Jul 10 2024

# Problem statement

What format should editors use to describe a chart?

# Decision Outcome

When settling on the use of [Apache eCharts](0001. Select a JavaScript chart library.md), and considering the problems that occurred in the [Graph extension](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Extension:Graph) we decided that we would only support pre-defined charts by default, i.e. not allow editors direct access to the underlying API.

While this would limit innovation (e.g. editors creating new graph types) we believe this is the best path forward to avoid the mistakes faced previously.

# Decision Drivers

* It should be possible to migrate from one JavaScript library to another without editor assistance (e.g. from Apache eCharts to Vega)
* Editors should not be impacted by schema migrations when upgrading JavaScript dependencies. For example Vega 2 to Vega 3 made breaking changes to the schema format for graphs, which our editors were not able to respond to in a timely manner which blocked upgrades to the Vega library.
* Editors should not be required to understand Lua to generate a chart. In the old system, users rarely hand-wrote graph definitions and instead used templates or Lua modules that took a simpler set of parameters. We believe this abstraction is better served in the code itself without use of templates.
* Protect ourselves from security issues
* Simplifying migration from existing template and module usages that wrapped Lua modules using a fairly common set of parameters.
* Easier reuse across multiple projects
* Easier localization of charts
