Phabricator: [T370739](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/T370739)

Status: Accepted

Date: August 12, 2024

# Problem statement

A chart is rendered by a Node.js library Apache eCharts but charts should be available to our
users with JavaScript disabled. How can we achieve this?

# Decision outcome

We original envisioned using shellbox given precedent for using this in the extensions
EasyTimeline, SyntaxHighlight and Score. As we explored this more, we realized it wasn't the best
fit for our use case. Shellbox is more suitable for things that are a binary (e.g. imagemagick)
and that don't change often, and can be a solution for miscellaneous stuff that doesn't fit any
other deployment option.

Using a NodeJS service seemed preferable, although not 100% ideal as service-runner isn't kept
totally up-to-date, there is a path to deploying and running node services. We decided to use this
as it will be easier to deploy changes to the service.

We discovered that [service-template-node](https://github.com/wikimedia/service-template-node)
was dated and fairly unmaintained with no recommended replacement. We were advised to move forward
with building a new service based on service-runner and Express, and deploying that using a Docker
container image built with Blubber and Github CI per the [Gitlab deployment workflow](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/GitLab/Workflows/Deploying_services_to_production).
This resulted in the [charts-renderer service](https://gitlab.wikimedia.org/repos/mediawiki/services/chart-renderer/).

We decided to retain the behaviour of shelling out to the script for local development
to avoid engineers having to setup the new Node service. The Node service acts as a CLI wrapper.

# Decision drivers

* Stability and availability of service
* Solution should not slow down development 
* Ability to monitor for issues in the service
* Aligns with the long term vision of SRE to not need Shellbox.
* Provides an easy path to production code
* Minimizes security risks
* Must be well supported by SRE
* We should be able to make changes to the Node service output regularly
